Dana Priest, welcome to Duke and thank you for participating in the Rutherfurd Living History Program.
In the period since September 11, 2001, the government and the press have been engaged in this sometimes bitter contest over control over the flow of information about the country’s national security.
And your work as an investigator at The Washington Post has been at the center of that contest.
I hope we can talk a little bit today about how you negotiated that challenging terrain between secrecy and freedom of the press.
NOTE chapter Early Career
You know first, I wanted to start a little bit further back and talk a little bit about your early career.
Because you’ve reported on local news, on healthcare policy, on immigration, and I know your interests as a journalist range widely.
So, how did you discover that you had an affinity for this world of the military and intelligence?
Did that come from something in your childhood?
Yeah, I really did—I came to journalism sort of late in life.
I didn’t really start as a journalist getting paid for it until I was 26 years old.
I had traveled a lot in my college days and really was interested in foreign affairs and didn’t know how to translate my interests into something.
So I had a number of internships—well I did have a newspaper when I was ten years old with my best friend.
But then there was a big interlude in between, and I didn’t really think about journalism.
And in college I was a photojournalist and did some writing but still didn’t know—you know, how am I going to translate that into foreign affairs?
NOTE paragraph
So I got a couple internships at good newspapers—The L.A. Times and San Jose Mercury, but I had no training whatsoever, and I remember the first day that I had my first internship with the L.A. Times—not a small paper—I was asked to write a three paragraph brief on something, I can’t remember what it was, some crime.
And I had no idea, because I didn’t have any formal training, I still have never taken a journalism class.
But I had no idea how to do that.
All I remember is the editor who sat in front of me, and we all sat facing them, and we had manual typewriters.
I remember him looking at it and just shaking his head like, “Who let her in?”
So, I learned really quickly there just through sheer embarrassment.
NOTE paragraph
And I love the reporting side—that was much more natural for me.
Trying to figure out, basically, you’re trying to figure out how to get over the wall—how to surmount an obstacle which just personality-wise must be of interest to me, because that’s sort of what the motivation for a lot of what I did later—was just, “No, you can’t go there.”
“Okay, well let me try to get there.”
So, when I came to The Washington Post as an intern I worked on the foreign desk out of graduate school.
And I just loved the people, I said, this is where I want to be.
NOTE paragraph
And I left graduate school—I was at Columbia at International Affairs School—I left in between first and second year and started my trek to a more responsible way of being a journalist.
So I went to the St. Pete Times and worked for 15 months as a general assignment reporter and found scandals, land scandals.
Florida is a great place; it’s like the Wild West.
NOTE paragraph
And then I came back to The Post as an editor on the foreign desk.
That was the way that my mentor, Jim Hoagland got me in.
And then I went—after that, the deal was a year later I was to start on Metro.
And I started in the smallest, best-run government country probably anywhere: Arlington County.
I just remember crossing the bridge—I lived in the District—crossing the bridge every day thinking, “What in the world am I going to write about here?”
But I found some good scandals.
I think I had a reputation for being what we call a fireman, someone you can send anywhere and they’d pretty much figure out how to get the story.
So I got sent to high-profile fires or the invasion of Panama.
Was just great fun.
NOTE paragraph
So people knew of my interest in foreign news.
When a spot came open on the national staff, I leaped to it even though it was on the federal page, so we covered federal government.
I really like covering bureaucracies, which sounds ridiculous, but I like covering the systems.
So I remember in the interview with the editor who was doing the hiring, I said, “You know, you’re not going to believe this, but I kind of like covering bureaucracies."
And she said, “Yeah, it’s like I like hospital food.”
It’s the same sort of bleh, yuck for bureaucracies.
NOTE paragraph
So that got me over to the national staff, which meant there was many more opportunities.
Once everybody knew of what my interest was then I could move around.
When the Pentagon job came open, I wasn’t necessarily—I was interested in it, but couldn’t quite make the match with foreign interests.
I remember the Pentagon correspondent with The Times, John Lancaster, sat down and tried to talk me out of it.
He just said, “This is a grind. So much to cover.”
But, the opportunity to go overseas and start to see the world that way was there, so I took it.
NOTE paragraph
But the problem was, the first year on the beat, you always share it with someone else.
So I shared it with Brad Graham.
First year on the beat were all these sex scandals.
So I was one of maybe one of the third or fourth females at the Pentagon, and here I was having to cover all these sex scandals which just had no—did not do my career well, because I’m sure that people thought, “Oh here she comes. You know, she wants to do all that.”
So, that was my first year there, and then I sort of transitioned even those scandals into covering the policy changes of the Pentagon.
Well let’s stop there for a second, because you know in the last years you’ve been asked, as you did reporting that we’re going to talk about in the course of this discussion, about intelligence and the War on Terror.
You were asked in various settings to sort of defend your work in revealing secrets.
In doing that you really talked a lot about the role of the press and the role the press plays in society.
Did you develop those views about the press as you did that work or did you come to that work already with that sort of idea in your head?
NOTE chapter Views on Role of the Press
You know, I think I came with the idea—an idea—that was not what it is now.
But the idea that I came with was one of the roles of the press is accountability.
So, in the beginning that means accountability on many different types of stories.
County government scandals, frauds, and I just fundamentally think that’s the most important thing that we do.
But when I got into the national security arena, especially the intelligence community, because that is a realm that’s like no other.
It’s not like covering the Pentagon which is a relatively open place.
NOTE paragraph
When I got to that point, I realized that the checks and balances that work in every other area, including the military, because there are open hearings, there are interest groups that can know what is going on in the Pentagon and help you figure it out, it doesn’t exist there.
So you have the three branches of government set up to be a check and a balance on the intelligence community, but it’s very hard for them to even do that job.
And when the stakes were so high after 9/11, it really became, I think, the whole reason the Constitution protects us is that they want us to be—the Framers did—another check on government.
And that became so much more important, because government itself was not checking itself. For several reasons.
NOTE paragraph
One, because it was a one-party government.
And that is just inherently—makes the checks more difficult to play themselves out.
But also because the country was so overtaken by the emotion and threat of 9/11, people whose job it was to question, “Well, what are we doing—is what we’re doing getting us where we want?” were not asking those questions.
And I happened to be the intelligence reporter at the time, and it just so happened that the CIA was where it is at in counterterrorism operations.
It wasn’t the military.
You could see the military in Afghanistan and think that they were running things and think that they were the main instrument of government policy.
But really it was the Agency.
NOTE paragraph
So when these stories started to come out that were—that started to question.
Actually, they didn’t really question in the beginning.
They tried to just explain what was happening.
I took my mindset from the Pentagon which was, there’s a war in Kosovo or there is a war in Panama, how is the war conducted tactically, and is that conduct going to get you to your goal?
NOTE paragraph
So, you could look at battles or you could look at strategy in various conflicts like Bosnia or Kosovo and you could see how the tactics but then the strategy was or was not going to get you what you wanted.
Civilian casualties is an obvious example.
In Kosovo there were a lot of bombings that killed civilians unintendedly, but it had a huge effect on how the war was prosecuted, how it became unpopular in Europe, all sorts of things.
Well, even though we can’t see it, because it’s the CIA that’s carrying it out, my feeling was those same questions were valid.
NOTE paragraph
And once you try to answer them, you automatically enter into a classified world, because they classified everything that was going on.
So that was not my choice, they classified it.
You enter into a situation in which, by it’s very nature, your sources are doing something potentially illegal and you’re doing something at least controversial.
Right. So, trying to marry that with your observations about your passion for bureaucracies.
It seems to me that one of the things that you did in both the Pentagon and the CIA is understand the areas in which these bureaucracies were pushing into new territories and getting outside their boundaries.
So at the Pentagon you wrote and wrote a book about nation building becoming a part of the Pentagon pressing into other areas occupied by other people.
In the case of the CIA, about the CIA becoming this secret jailer, which was a new area for them.
To do that in the CIA, how much did you have to feel or plot a way into that secret culture so that you could understand the way that bureaucracy actually functioned, and how did you do that?
Well, you do have to go inside any culture that you’re writing about in order to understand the context and motivation for what they’re doing.
And the legality and how they justify what they’re doing.
And I think that too many stories are void of context.
And so, even though I was writing things that would be considered controversial within the Agency, I always tried because I think it’s the right thing to do, to understand—to put in the stories the context.
And in order to do that, you have to have conversations with people that include that.
And actually I think all decent reporters would do that anyway, because you want to know—who’s going to talk to you if they don’t trust you?
NOTE paragraph
And one way that they, I think, one way you earn their trust is just to convince them, which I think in my case it’s not a game, it’s totally true that I wanted to understand how this came to be and why it came to be and what were the conversations inside.
And I think I was totally genuine about that.
Because I don’t see the world as black and white, and I don’t see most—I don’t think I’ve met many people at all who I would consider to be evil, bad people just because they rendered somebody.
They were doing something they thought was legal and right, and they should do it.
So, how did that come to be?
NOTE paragraph
So you have to get—you gain people’s trust, they tell you—they want to tell you why they’re doing this in the bigger context, not just in the “because we can” context.
I just think that that’s a critical part of understanding how things develop.
NOTE chapter Secret Prisons Story
9/11 happens.
And after 9/11 you’re one of the first reporters to bore into this question of the treatment of terrorism suspects who are detained overseas.
And in December of 2002 you author a story with Bart Gellman, your colleague at The Post, and wrote about a secret CIA detention facility in Afghanistan.
This isn’t the Salt Pit when you talk about Bagram originally.
And you revealed some of the violent practices that were being used in the interrogation of detainees.
And this story also deepened the story referred to the CIA’s “other secret detention centers overseas.”
So at this point in December 2002, which is almost three years before the stories that got a lot of attention, you knew that there was a secret CIA detention operation going on?
You know, I knew—it’s hard to look back now and describe how it was unraveled, but it was just—we could poke a hole in the curtain and see just a little bit in there.
You weren’t really sure what you were seeing.
So in those stories, that came out of a question: where are the prisoners going?
And then you would hear, well they’ve treated Khalid Sheik Mohammed or others in a certain way.
And so you’re—“Okay, who’s they? Where are they?”
NOTE paragraph
And so it was just simple questions like that that started to lead to thinking that there was a system in place that we needed to find out what were the rules and what was it doing.
I remember in that story in particular, we had a lot of information, but it was going to be hard to, because we lacked a lot of information, it was going to be hard to put a kind of structure around it and say that this was part of a bigger system.
I’m not sure we knew then at the time.
NOTE paragraph
I think the piece of information that allowed it to take on a reality was this idea that these techniques were called stress and duress techniques.
I remember talking to the person that told me about that, and when he said that—okay, that means they’re called something which means that they’re in a document and they come out of a training, they are in a—you know, it’s a formalized set of almost instructions or techniques, which means the system is adopting them.
So it’s not an ad hoc thing.
And it was just that little bit of detail that could make it—that could frame it in a way that could make it feel real even though we weren’t quoting our sources.
NOTE paragraph
You know, you couldn’t name anybody, and there was some vagueness about the sites.
I didn’t know—at the time I think I didn’t know—no clue how many, or were they mostly in Afghanistan, but they did have others.
That’s all I think we knew at the time.
And it really did take three years to piece together anything really substantial.
NOTE paragraph
I mean, you refer to the Salt Pit.
That was the next place, but that was still in Afghanistan.
The New York Times wrote about Thailand.
So, we were getting—at the same time we were understanding this whole rendition flight situation.
So now you have, okay they’re taking them somewhere, so where?
Just to capture a little bit of the timeline here.
So in December of 2002 this comes out.
You turn the page into 2003, now we’re fully in the run-up to the war in Iraq.
Did either the demands on the news organization or just the national conversation obsessed with the Iraq situation, did that divert attention to this just as a reporting matter?
It did, but I tried as hard as I could to kind of stay on it, and there were other reporters at the paper who were more interested in Iraq and who were pursuing that, luckily.
Luckily for me, yeah.
NOTE paragraph
There’s a lot of pressure for all of us to pursue it, and a part of me likes to always go somewhere else when there’s a lot of people on one thing.
So luckily there were other reporters.
I just kept also picking at that.
And I didn’t think we would actually invade Iraq.
Really?
Yeah, we had a bet among all the national security reporters at the paper.
And Walter Pincus, who covers intelligence also, Walter and I were the only ones out of eight reporters who said, “There is no way they’re going to invade Iraq. What are they going to do after they invade?”
You know, we really thought, there’s just no way they’ll do this.
NOTE paragraph
And I think we might have been reflecting our institutions, because the Agency at the time—even though they were definitely supporting the president’s view that there were—the view—that there were weapons of mass destruction, they were also deeply concerned about what came next.
So you invade, what about after that?
NOTE paragraph
Knowing a little bit about peace-keeping and nation-building from my prior work, I just thought, we’re not going to do this, take this on.
So we lost those bets.
So as you continue to piece this together, or as we once said, sort of piece the pieces together, one of the key insights you seem to come on reading it now is the importance of the role that these liaison relationships played.
It’s notable because not a lot of people pick up on that.
And as you follow your work through that period, this becomes an increasingly sort of telling aspect of it.
How did you hit on that, and is that true that that sort of led you towards a greater depth of understanding what was happening?
Yeah, that is really true.
At first, I was focused on what the Agency was doing—the fact that it had become largely a paramilitary force and that its other long-term espionage and other interests were falling by the wayside in favor of everything that the counterterrorism center was doing.
And what they were doing was targeting individuals.
So they were doing the manhunting and they were doing targeted killings with then the predator we find.
So that’s where all the activity is.
NOTE paragraph
But pretty quickly, as I’m trying to figure out how that’s being done, the people who know the Agency much better than I do are talking to me about how it’s done, and that is you’re working with your partners.
Well that turned out to be the—it’s still to this day—the most important thing that—the most important relationship the Agency has.
It’s at the heart of what they do is their—what they call their liaison relations with other countries’ intelligence services.
Well, that just seemed like it opened up a whole new world.
It really is the center of gravity of what they do.
NOTE paragraph
And I think people have this movie version of what they do, which is the guy in the trench coat bribing somebody to give them documents.
Well, in this case, it is almost using another country—well, using another country’s intelligence services to find the terrorist in their country.
Of course they know their country better.
And they’re using their local police forces and all of that.
NOTE paragraph
So now you have—it just for me shifted the lens away from just this unilateral, as they call it, CIA-only operations into a world in which now they have the go-ahead to make a lot more—a lot deeper—relationships with countries around the world where they’re worried about terrorism.
And it so happens that a lot of those countries were countries whose governments we weren’t necessarily, you know, at another level supporting because they weren’t democratic.
So now you have our No. 1 security threat tied to having tighter relationships with countries that we’re not really supposed to be supporting, because they’re not really democratic.
So that causes a whole new set of questions.
So was that, and I know you talk about a lot of different—so you talk about a very diverse range of countries, and you’ve written about the relationship with say a country like France and then a relationship with a country like Jordan.
Was this a question of the CIA basically deepening the relationships it already had, or are they building whole new relationships?
They were doing both.
And they had the money and the authority, certainly, but especially the money, to do that.
To come to a country like Yemen and say, “We will give you X, Y, Z. We’ll bring you this equipment.”
They wouldn’t give it to Yemen, but they would use it with Yemen, a country where we had barely any relations.
And George Tenet was really great at this because he’s a back-slapper and he could fit into any culture really.
He was an excellent envoy to do that.
NOTE paragraph
And so they established relations in a place like Yemen, and in a place like France they broadened them quite substantially.
I love the French story, because it just put a lie to the main above-ground version of our relations with France.
Because while we were deepening these relations and creating the first multinational counterterrorism center in Paris, while we were doing that above ground, in the open world, even the defense secretary was bashing the French for not wanting to come to Iraq.
NOTE paragraph
So, to me, this is why I love the intelligence world.
Because it is so different than what you see in the public realm.
But it’s reality, and so these great contradictions were going on.
So I want to ask you just a brief question about context in 2005 before we talk about the secret prisons story that was published in November of 2005.
2005 turns out to be sort of a watershed year for this kind of reporting.
Your stories come out, which is not just one story but a series of stories over the course of the year.
The New York Times publishes its domestic surveillance story, this story about national security letters.
There’s a number of things that sort of bubble up in that year.
NOTE paragraph
Looking back, is that because there is a context in which people have grown disenchanted with the war in Iraq and perhaps with the administration—are there more willing to talk?
Or is this just a sort of confluence of a lot of different interests?
I’ve thought about that a lot.
And I think about why—and it really just was a handful of newspapers.
And it really, even more precisely it was The New York Times and The Washington Post.
Sometimes pursuing the same things, but sometimes, as you mentioned, the national security articles that The New York Times outed.
NOTE paragraph
I think that first it was reporters picking away and finding people who were willing to help, either because they were proud of what was going on or they had questions about it, or you just developed relationships and they trusted you.
But what I don’t think is that—not in my case, people weren’t seeking me out.
Well you’ve said that during this entire time nobody just volunteers—
No.
Called you or sent you an email saying I know you’re working on this, I can help you.
Well, or they didn’t drop an anonymous or other kind of note that says, “Hey, psst, did you hear what’s going on at the Agency?”
No, no. I’m waiting for that still.
NOTE paragraph
And this is why, again, I wish that year had been more appreciated for what role the journalist—journalism played in the understanding of what our government was doing.
None of it came from Congress.
It all came from the media.
NOTE paragraph
And when you, again, you look at the purpose of the protection we’re given, it’s to enter this contest that has only some rules, enter a contest with the other branches to debate some of these crucial things about what we are doing in our pursuit of, in this case, counterterrorism.
So, the year 2005 advances.
You write a story about the Salt Pit in Afghanistan, which was a secret CIA detention facility where, as you revealed, an Afghan detainee had died.
There again you mention, almost parenthetically, that this is one of several centers of detention that the CIA maintains around the world.
NOTE paragraph
This goes through the year until November 2, when The Washington Post publishes a story that reveals, in much greater detail, that there’s a network of places around the world, including in Eastern European democracies, which is the big headline of that piece.
Did you know during the whole course of the year that you were working towards that story?
Did that seem to be the real core of it to you?
Well, I had editors like yourself and others, who at various points would say, “We should do a story that understands—puts together the whole thing.”
I’m like, “Yeah, we should.”
But, I can’t.
NOTE paragraph
So running in the back of my mind during all those stories, not the ’02 story yet, but the ones in ’04, is this idea that at some point I really want to get as much as I can on the whole thing.
Because, again, we’re also writing about rendition flights.
We’re also writing about interrogation techniques.
NOTE paragraph
So yeah, I really had—I was working all that time to gather—to figure out where they are, to know how they came to be in those countries, to understand, again it goes back the liaison relationships, why would other countries permit it—that whole thing.
So I was definitely picking away at that for that whole year.
And you knew when that piece was published, you knew that that was going to be a big piece?
You know, because I was—I personally was focused on this for a year, when it finally did publish I felt like, you know, I kind of feel like I’ve written this before.
And so while it created a big controversy within the government before we published it, and that was a big deal, to me it felt like I was just adding detail to something I was already telling people was there.
So it didn’t seem quite as big a deal as it did to other people.
NOTE paragraph
I remember somebody, a member of Congress who I called up to try to get them to comment before the story was out.
Or no, the day after the story.
And the person said, “Well enjoy your fifteen minutes of fame.”
And I thought, about what?
It’s not that big a deal.
NOTE paragraph
That’s where you realize that there are certain elements to a particular story that grab people by the collar.
So even though, I had mentioned the stories that there were these other sites, it was a throwaway line people didn’t really react to it the same way.
We’ll talk about the reaction in a minute, I think.
But I wonder whether or not one of the elements here was that the government had actually become very engaged in—before publication—with trying to prevent you, or prevent The Post, from publishing this, and that added a sense of sort of heightened urgency to the thing.
And it’s been written about and said before that editors at The Post met with representatives of the government, including the president.
And that the government officials asked to withhold certain details.
I don’t think it’s betraying anything to say that they also asked just not to publish the whole thing.
But they asked that in a kind of like, “We would really like you not to publish it,” but they knew—
They were trying to negotiate the details of it, yes that’s correct.
And editors decided to withhold certain details, including the names of some of the countries.
Do you—looking back—do you think that was the right decision?
I do.
In fact, I think that I didn’t think it was the right decision when—well I was conflicted about.
It wasn’t that I disagreed with it, but I was really conflicted about whether it was the right decision on the day that the decision was made, mainly because it boiled down to two competing thoughts.
NOTE paragraph
One: was it responsible to do this?
That some of the government’s arguments seemed like they were very credible, particularly the ones that said these countries would stop doing what some of the other less controversial things.
And I knew what some of those things were, luckily.
NOTE paragraph
On the other hand, were we complicit now in an illegal act?
Because those prisons would be illegal in the countries.
So were we complicit in that?
NOTE paragraph
Those we’re the sort of two—and, the uncomfortableness of a reporter knowing something that they’re not going to tell the public—that’s just contrary to everything that reporters are sort of about.
But I do think that it’s the right decision now.
I didn’t think that probably just even a week after it came out.
It hasn’t stopped the governments in Europe looking at this themselves.
NOTE paragraph
The other thing, though, that’s important that’s happening during this time, and the reason why the conversation with the government becomes important in that story, is the government is trying to discredit the stories.
You can’t—a competitor can’t follow a story that they can’t—they don’t have the sources on.
So a lot of times my stories, like the Salt Pit story and others, they didn’t have a bounce—like TV could report on them but The New York Times could not because they didn’t have the source.
So the story sort of stops right there.
NOTE paragraph
On the secret prisons story, I know, because my colleagues have told me, that the government tried to discredit the story, even though there’s a paragraph in there that told readers that there is this big dialogue.
So they discredit the story with those reporters?
Yeah.
And did they discredit it because it wasn’t true?
Or they said it was already known?
I—no it wasn’t true.
But I don’t know exactly what the conversation was, I was just told like a year later by two colleagues in two competitors.
NOTE paragraph
After the story ran there is a point—The New York Times runs a wire service story out of Europe when the first investigation was concluding saying there’s no evidence of these prisons.
Well that ricocheted around a lot too.
And it didn’t make any sense.
Because why would The Washington—maybe it’s possible that The Post was all wrong.
Yeah. Right, right.
And then there’s fallout immediately on Capitol Hill.
Porter Goss, who’s very angry about these stories, goes to Congress and says that the damage from the story was “very severe to our capabilities to carry out our mission.”
Have you in intervening years ever heard or found evidence that there was very severe damage?
Well, this was something I tried, first of all, to figure out before the stories ran, because I wanted to know myself what that argument would be and also whether that is a possibility.
I had people who were helping me trying to figure that out before the stories even got published.
And then—well, I do know that at least in one case it caused great strain, and there was more activity between the two—the U.S. sent people over to hold their hands and tell them that wasn’t the end of the world and that they wouldn’t be outed and all this sort of thing.
But it happened in more than one case.
But, my feeling—of course, there won’t be prisons in those countries anymore, because they’re too worried about that.
But the larger relationship continues.
This is something that in history has been the case.
NOTE paragraph
I remember talking to former Agency people on this, and even themselves saying, “Ugh, that’s always the argument.”
And yes, sometimes it causes some temporary indigestion, but when you look at the fundamental mutual interest of countries in fighting terrorism, that is not going to be put to rest by an embarrassing story.
One or two or three of them.
They have an interest in doing this together.
But this was the CIA’s architecture for its detention and interrogation scheme, and this upset that.
Those centers were closed.
Right.
And the centers were closed, and they moved people out of those places.
Not quite sure where they put them.
And then they eventually closed them.
NOTE paragraph
But that is one thing that had already been discussed before the story ran in the Agency.
People were saying, “How can you maintain this forever? You’re going to try to keep this secret for lives of these terrorists?”
So the idea that you had to do something was already percolating, and I think that it pushed that along.
After the story is published, the CIA begins a leak investigation and interviews—it was reported to have been—scores of Agency employees trying to find out who might have been a source for the story.
And six months later, I think in the same week that you were awarded the Pulitzer Prize for the stories, a senior official at the CIA, Mary McCarthy, is fired and the Agency says—or people at the Agency say—the reason was that she talked to various journalists including you.
And then through her attorney, Ms. McCarthy said that she was not a source for the secret prisons story.
NOTE paragraph
When that was going on, did you feel like you wanted to speak out and clarify what your reporting relationship was or wasn’t with her?
Or did you know from the beginning that this was something you just needed to stay out of?
Well, I had both feelings.
Sure, I’d like to be able to say things, but on the other hand there’s no way.
What was going on at that time, again, was the Agency was very worried about the stories.
Not just mine, but The New York Times.
And they were trying to find ways to put a chill into the community.
And I remember people telling me at the time that that action was meant to send a message to people.
NOTE paragraph
And I think they chose it because she didn’t lose her—my understanding is she didn’t lose her pension, she was about to retire anyway—
But she was a week from retirement.
Yeah.
Well again, a week from retirement.
I don’t know to what extent they even tried to prove anything.
I don’t even think that was the point.
NOTE paragraph
I think the point was to create a belief among other people that they were looking, they were out there, they would take measures, and there were certain reporters they didn’t want people to talk to.
Because at the same time, there’s an investigation going on with The New York Times.
And I think the government truly is upset about the leaks.
They weren’t sure how to stop it.
Yeah.
Do you think the government, at that point—and this is looking back—aided by people in the news media itself?
Cable people who bring up your name and say, “If there’s another attack blame Dana Priest” and this kind of thing.
Was there an effort to make you part of the story?
How do you—did you feel like you were becoming part of the story?
I think that that was happening more than usual.
Instead of like The Washington Post they could choose a name and use that.
I don’t know to what extent that was meant to make me uncomfortable or whatever.
The leader of the House and the Senate came out and called for an investigation of the story not of the prisons.
Yeah, I was going to ask about that, but yeah.
They were definitely trying—the administration and all their friends—were definitely trying to make the press the bad guy.
NOTE chapter Post-9/11 Intelligence Reporting
So let’s pull back from that a little bit.
The administration after 9/11 famously says explicitly and in a whole bunch of different ways that the rules have changed.
And we see this play out through the detention and interrogation policies.
We see it play out through the expansion of the sort of secret world of engagement with the nation’s enemies.
Looking back over this period, are there ways in which you can see the rules of the game or the rules of the interaction between the government and the press changing too?
Oh yeah.
So how would you describe that?
Well, in the first three years after 9/11—maybe two, maybe it was the first two, for sure—there’s a total lockdown of information, even in the Pentagon.
Which hurt the—it hurt relations, but it also troubled a lot of the public affairs people in the Pentagon, because they had pretty good relations with media people, and they had learned the hard way about that.
But Rumsfeld, the secretary of defense, insisted that this was the new world.
NOTE paragraph
So they were not willing to give you basic information that you ordinarily can get about certain engagements, certain deployments of troops and that sort of thing.
And it was all under the umbrella of security and new world and there’s a terrorist around.
You know, there are terrorists in the country, and you just can’t tell that much anymore.
People were legitimately—they were afraid.
NOTE paragraph
It made reporting harder, and I think it also deterred some normal conversation and pushing on the part of the press for the first two years.
When you look back, I wonder whether or not in the end the results are sort of mixed and that the Bush administration succeeded in really controlling the flow of information—classified information particularly—in the run-up to the war in Iraq where you really see a breakdown in any sort of contest over that information.
The information is just flowing in ways into the public domain.
NOTE paragraph
From sort of 2005 on you see—and it may be you could argue that it’s delayed because you’re reporting on things that in some cases—not you but other people, you and other people together—reporting on things that happened earlier.
So you didn’t find out torture memos—so-called torture memos—we didn’t know that the day that they were written, but eventually that information came out.
NOTE paragraph
On balance, do you feel like it was sort of a—there was a mixed bag?
Or do you feel like at the end of that period that something fundamental had shifted in the relationship between, or in that flow of information?
Well, I think that initially—and the initial part lasted too long—there was a fundamental shift where the news media was not doing its job.
And it was not doing it for two reasons.
NOTE paragraph
One is that it was really hard, and two because not only in the nation, but there was pressure, public pressure not to delve into certain things.
It might play a role in the run-up to the war in Iraq, but how I like to see that period is, you know, as much as people criticized us for writing classified information, they blame us now for not writing more classified information about the reality of the run-up to the war in Iraq.
NOTE paragraph
So I think the public also doesn’t appreciate the role that you need to play and the consequences of Iraq are what they are.
They are hugely important.
So the lockdown of information then definitely continued.
And you had fewer and fewer people doing it.
I think that’s the consequence.
I want to ask you just one other question about what it’s like to be a reporter doing these kinds of stories.
And especially when you get into the intelligence world.
Does it require you to become like a spy?
Do you feel like you’re going from the outside to the inside and then you’re on the inside?
Yeah.
You feel—and this is true though for many beats that I’ve been on.
When I was covering the military, I just felt that I had to fit in a certain way.
It’s not a big deal but just—.
How do you get people to trust you?
You are with them.
NOTE paragraph
So in the military you could be with them on deployments, and they could judge you every day and I could judge them every day.
And it worked.
It created a deeper, for me, it allowed me deeper inside.
NOTE paragraph
With the Agency, part of the reason I took the job is because I thought it would be kind of like the military, but it’s completely the opposite.
You can’t go anywhere with them.
They can’t tell anybody they’re talking to you, they take polygraphs—you have to take a polygraph and one of the questions that they’re asked is have you had any unauthorized contact with the media.
So having that contact is really, to me, it is like you described.
NOTE paragraph
You’re inside—I used to think of it as, or feel, as if I was underwater.
I was looking around in the rocks underwater, because the world that you’re in is so particular and it’s almost physical.
And so how you move around in that world is you learn how to do it, but it’s particular to that world.
And that underwater area of our country is growing vastly.
It’s growing, and it’s not necessarily any easier to get at.
But that’s all the more reason to try.
NOTE paragraph
And my fear about journalism broadly is that not enough people are trying.
And now why is that?
Because the industry but also maybe they aren’t—maybe they need a little help in figuring out how to try.
So after the stories came out in 2005 as you mentioned, leaders of both houses of Congress called for investigations.
But the investigations they were calling for was about how this information was leaked and whether or not reporters should be brought over to reveal how they obtained this information, rather than an investigation of the secret prison system.
Why do you think that was the reaction?
Even though the Republicans had the majority, why didn’t Democrats contest that?
Why isn’t there some effort to—?
It wasn’t popular outside the government either.
I mean it wasn’t like—I got more hate mail than I did appreciative notes.
Yeah. But I did get some appreciative notes.
NOTE paragraph
And I think the Democrats were—what you see today from the Democrats is 180 degrees different from what you saw then.
It was largely silent.
You could get a couple people saying this is really important, this is not what our country is— what it’s founded on, this is not American values, blah blah blah, but they wouldn’t step out and say much at all—
So this is politics.
It’s totally politics, like it is now.
NOTE chapter Neglect at Walter Reed Story
So, we’ll get to now in a minute, but there’s this intervening episode in your career which is very powerful and sort of reflects on this.
Which is in 2007, you and a colleague, Anne Hull, break the story of neglect and inadequate care for wounded veterans, outpatients, at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
And you went on to write a number of stories about other aspects of medical and psychological care that returning veterans received.
And this wins you your second Pulitzer Prize and creates a much different reaction, both in the bureaucracies—at least in Congress—and in the public.
How much do you think that reflected just the change in the mood of the country or what accounted for that?
It’s a different kind of story too.
It was really a different kind of—there was no classified information.
So that already gets you—you know, you’re already on top.
There was a different mood by that time.
NOTE paragraph
To me, it’s almost the straw that broke the camel’s back in terms of the public’s view of the war and of President Bush’s conduct of the war.
None of which is motivating us.
We’re motivated by this “oh my God story” we hear.
NOTE paragraph
By that time—I think, pretty much, there had been many stories written about the heroism and the unbelievable care of soldiers, especially amputees and all the great new technology, the spirit, you know, they’re gonna still go climb the mountain.
So this story just is the complete opposite of the public view of how we’re all treating—how the soldiers are being treated.
NOTE paragraph
It comes when—and so it happens to come when Bush is—his credibility is starting to wane, the war is going badly, and other people have said to me, but it’s not something I really thought about at the time, that it was easier to criticize.
The fact is, we found Walter Reed after the number of outpatients had peaked.
It was actually higher the year before.
And still nobody heard about it, which is, to me, unbelievable.
It shows that the military—that the soldiers didn’t want, necessarily, to complain about this.
Or they didn’t view the press as a place to go.
NOTE paragraph
And in fact, that’s not how we got onto the story in the first place.
It was a non-military person who had met with some of the families who called up and said she wanted to talk about this because she couldn’t believe what was happening.
NOTE paragraph
So yeah, the outpouring—these two stories are really bookends of a lot of things, including the public reaction.
There was, immediately, the politicians—who by the way were responsible for doing oversight on Walter Reed for all the years that it existed like this.
And many of them went up there and did the happy shots and took pictures and everything.
Those people were supposed to be paying attention, but now they’re jumping on the bandwagon saying, how could this happen?
Same with the Army and the Defense Department writ large, the secretary of defense immediately got onto the case.
NOTE paragraph
I think they were also worried that reporters throughout they country would go to their local hospitals and local bases, which they did, and the Army sent out like a rapid reaction deployment force to check all the hospitals like the day after Walter Reed, because they were getting so much internal pressure about this.
Again, completely the opposite of the secret prisons.
From retirees, a really important community to them, that they knew it wasn’t going to blow over.
And so the response was, how much can we do, how fast?
NOTE chapter Obama’s Presidency and Transparency
So, we get to today and the Obama administration comes in with a very powerful message.
Right beneath the change message is a message of openness.
And the president made a big point of going to the National Archives within the first months of his administration to pledge a whole new approach to classification of information, to declassification.
And in there he talks about the relationship between—or the role that a free press plays in holding the government accountable, including on areas of national security that might be classified.
And goes a long way towards drawing a distinction between the way his administration and the way the prior administration are going to approach these questions.
So is it different?
No.
And what does that mean—?
Well, it means there’s no—I’m back into the realm of intelligence now, I’m trying to do some work, and it’s just as hard.
If not harder because of the past, but there’s been no openness, no mandate for being more open on the official level where we’re supposed to communicate with the agencies, which is basically in the public affairs shops.
Which are unlike other parts of government–-they’re critical in the intel community.
NOTE paragraph
They are largely the same people that they used to be, and they—as far as I can tell—they have exactly the same attitude that they used to.
Which is, no, this is classified.
They haven’t—they have declassified those memos, which is a big deal because of what they are, but they haven’t opened up anything else, including contemporaneous things that are happening now or anything else from the past.
And does that just suggest that the bureaucracies are still defending their prerogative of secrecy against the White House’s wishes?
Or it means that it’s in everybody’s interested in the branches of government to maintain hold on this?
Well, I think that Obama hasn’t—I never thought that once he got inside he would change that level of discourse, because there’s a reason the CIA exists.
It is to do things that are not—fundamentally, it’s to do things that aren’t legal for anyone else to do overseas, not in the United States.
NOTE paragraph
So if you maintain that organization, it’s because you realize that you want to do these things, you want to steal secrets, you want to kill the remaining Al-Qaeda leaders.
And you think you can only do it in secrecy.
You’re kind of boxed in.
NOTE paragraph
What he did do is, well, this was only half a loaf, he closed the secret—he said that he wasn’t going to do the renditions anymore, but he actually left a huge loophole.
So he pretty much suspended them.
They have the ability to do them again if they want.
And he’s tried to carve out a national security exemption in the shield law.
So he is seeing, just like his predecessors, a national security imperative that will put reporting—that will keep reporting on that in a box, in a dark box, which is very difficult to do.
NOTE chapter Future of Investigative Journalism
Now I know that you spent a lot of time thinking about not only about your own investigative work but about investigative journalism more broadly.
One of the paradoxes of the time that we’re in is even though some of this work has been incredibly urgent and at the center of the national debate about important issues, it’s occurred at a time when parts of the news media, particularly newspapers, are in sort of mortal peril of dissolving.
NOTE paragraph
As you look at the Washington investigative reporting environment, and especially around national security, do you see a sort of hollowing out of this ability?
Do you look at colleagues coming up through the traditional pathways who you would say, you know, “Whatever sort of little torch I have I’m going to pass on to this person at some point?”
Where do you see that right now in Washington?
Well, unfortunately there really are just two papers that continue to try, which is The Washington Post and The New York Times.
And some of the news magazines, but they’re especially shrinking fast.
The L.A. Times, which has some great reporters doing this work, has also shrunk to a point that it’s hard for those reporters to do much of the work.
So, first you have a shrinking pool of reporters.
NOTE paragraph
And then, in some senses it’s personality driven.
Who happens to occupy those beats?
Do they have the same idea about what they should be covering, and are they able to get deep sources?
Do they have editors who are pushing them to do certain things?
It’s really idiosyncratic in that way.
It’s very much individual-driven.
NOTE paragraph
But you do have, at The Post in particular, but probably at The Times a little bit, a higher level of editor who will—if reporters are not tough enough, they should be pushing in a national security direction, I think.
As we know, there’s a lot of turmoil at The Post in various ways and some at The Times.
So I’m not sure that this is going to be seen, this moment here, as the strongest moment for national security reporting.
NOTE paragraph
Hopefully, what we’re not seeing is a decline in the interest in that among the leaders of these papers.
Because once that happens, then it really is just dependent on the personalities of individual reporters.
So, and finally, you’ve had great instincts over your career in sort of following your interests and going at the things that really obsessed you and that you could spend a lot—sustain the energy and focus to be able to find a map.
So now you’ve described this process of living underwater for some period.
And even though you come up and do other things once in awhile, this has been where you’ve been spending most of your energy and intellectual capital and experience.
Does that feel like a sustainable thing to you?
Does your interest carry or is there a way to bridge the sort of underwater and above water worlds in journalism that you think you can take advantage of?
You know, I think there’s a way to bridge it, although I’m not quite sure—I think you have to come up and go down.
But as you—you do develop a reputation good or bad for understanding how the community works.
NOTE paragraph
First of all, I think that always you’re building a foundation for yourself.
So that I know now, because I’m working right now on a project that’s taken a year to do and it’s still not over in the intelligence community, in which I’ve learned so much about other agencies and how they work and other areas that have problems, and I’m not going to right now go towards them.
It’s just given me a lot more underwater caves to dwell in.
NOTE paragraph
As much as I try to ween myself off that addiction, because it i s really hard, I can see that if I can pace myself in a way that doesn’t—if I can pace myself, I hope to be doing it, or doing it with other people, for awhile still.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Thank you for having me.